+++
date = "2018-06-05T00:00:00"
title = "EVA²: Exploiting Temporal Redundancy in Live Computer Vision"
abstract = ""
abstract_short = ""
event = "ISCA 2018"
event_url = "http://iscaconf.org/isca2018/"
location = "Los Angeles, US"

selected = false
math = true

url_pdf = "pdf/isca-2018.pdf"
url_slides = "slides/isca-2018.pptx"
url_video = "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IX-xfBTcPyo&feature=youtu.be"

# Optional featured image (relative to `static/img/` folder).
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++
Hardware support for deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is critical to advanced computer vision in mobile and embedded devices. Current designs, however, accelerate generic CNNs; they do not exploit the unique characteristics of real-time vision. We propose to use the temporal redundancy in natural video to avoid unnecessary computation on most frames. A new algorithm, activation motion compensation, detects changes in the visual input and incrementally updates a previously-computed output. The technique takes inspiration from video compression and applies well-known motion estimation techniques to adapt to visual changes. We use an adaptive key frame rate to control the trade-off between efficiency and vision quality as the input changes. We implement the technique in hardware as an extension to existing state-of-the-art CNN accelerator designs. The new unit reduces the average energy per frame by 54.2%, 61.7%, and 87.6% for three CNNs with less than 1% loss in vision accuracy.
