+++
date = "2022-01-07T16:25:31-04:00"
highlight = false
math = false
draft = false
tags = []
title = "How to Make Your First DJ Mix"

[header]
  caption = ""
  image = ""

+++

![Me DJing at a local show](/img/dj-post/me-djing2.jpg)

If you're reading this then you must be interested to learn how you can create
your very first DJ mix! I've written this post to be as beginner friendly as
possible, but there are a few things that you will need before you can get
started. To find out what those are, please check out my [previous
post](/post/what-you-need-djing) which goes into all the details.

An especially important point that I would like to make is that that there are
many ways to succeed when DJing! This blog post describes a very specific method
that I use for creating my own mixes, but you are absolutely not limited to this
system. If you want to use Traktor instead of Rekordbox, ignore cue points
completely, or never organize your music that is totally OK! My intention for
writing this blog post is to simplify DJing into a few important steps that when
followed can bring someone from being completely new to being ready to play at
their next party. If you ever want to deviate from what I'm writing here, go
ahead!

Finally, I also wanted to mention that if you get stuck at any point in this
list of steps that's OK! I'll try to keep checking the comments section at the
bottom of this post for questions, so feel free to ask any that you might have.
Also, keep in mind that it is often possible for you to make things easier for
yourself. For example, I often recommend that new DJs practice on House music
since the clear repetitive beat is great for learning beat matching and the long
intros and outros make mixing a bit easier. Struggling to find songs with the
right key and BPM? Feel free to expand your music library so that you have more
options! There are many ways to help yourself out by being a little flexible.

Alright, lets get started!

## First time setup and basics skills to learn

1. Import your music library into your DJ software

    Your first step is to get your music library into your Rekordbox collection.
You will also want to analyze all of your songs to get their BPM and key
signature. To do this, simply click and drag songs into the Rekordbox window. If
they don't begin analyzing automatically, you can select them and then select
analyze tracks when right clicking.

    I also recommend changing a few settings in Rekordbox. For example, I
recommend you set your column headers to be the following: Preview, Artwork,
Track Title, Artist, BPM, Key, Rating, and Comments. You can choose whatever
columns you want displayed by right clicking on the header of your collection
display window. I also recommend setting the waveform display to be RGB (this
makes it easier to identify phrases in the waveform) and the key display to be
Camelot notation (this makes it easier to check if tracks are in key). Both of
these modes can be changed in the Rekordbox settings.

2. Set up and familiarize yourself with your hardware

    Hook up your DJ controller to your laptop, some speakers, and a pair of
headphones. Because this is your first time DJing, you might not be familiar
with all of the different buttons and knobs on your controller. The video below
is a great explanation of how to use the DDJ-400 controller. The DDJ-400 is my
recommendation for a good beginner controller, but even if you have different
hardware the video will still be helpful since it goes over all the basics which
are included on all DJ hardware. Once you watch that video, you will have a much
better idea of how to use your new equipment!

    {{< youtube \_gktzXnZVJk >}}

3. Practice beat matching by ear

    When transitioning between two tracks, it is important that the beats of the
two songs are synchronized (matched). When playing two tracks on a controller or
all-in-one DJ system you can visually see if the beats are aligned or not. To be
honest, using this visual cue to beat match is how I got started, but it does
have some issues. The problem comes in if the beat grid of one of the songs has
been analyzed incorrectly, or if you are using CDJs (which display song
waveforms separately without being on top of each other). For this reason it is
important for all new DJs to learn how to beat match by ear. For an excellent
explanation and demonstration of beat matching by ear I recommend the video
below.

    {{< youtube GuE5x65XZF4 >}}

4. Practice transitioning between songs

    Now that you have your music library in your DJ software, you've set up your
hardware, familiarized yourself with its knobs, and you've practiced beat
matching by ear, you're finally ready to do your first transition! Start by
finding a House track which has an intro and outro which consists almost
entirely of just a simple drum beat (this keeps it simple). Then, add this track
to both of your decks and practice transitioning from the outro of the song on
one track into the outro of the song on the other track. Transitions are much
better demonstrated than explained, so take a look at the video below to learn
more.

    {{< youtube id="Y4dqD-g7SHE?start=1545" autoplay="false" >}}

    Once you feel more comfortable with the basic fade, try transitioning
between two different songs with similar BPM and key. Once you feel comfortable
with BPM adjustment, beat matching, EQs and fading, you're off to the races!
There are many other types of transitions of course (and feel free to create
your own!), but for EDM DJs the basic fade can get you nearly all of the way
there. For more creative transition ideas check out [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Hc8bmEaCqM&ab_channel=Crossfader), and
for examples of how to transition between two songs with significantly different
BPMs or genres, check out [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-yuKamRvQOc&ab_channel=Crossfader).


5. Organize your music library

    Some people have an insanely good memory and can easily remember what songs
they want to play for any given mood or genre. I am not that kind of person! For
me, I find it very helpful to do a few small things whenever I load in new music
that help me down the line. Here I'll explain what I do for each new track and
why I find it helpful.

    When creating a new mix or playing live you will often be interested in
finding tracks which fit a certain mood, are a certain genre, or even just songs
that you personally think are really good. While BPM and key are easy to filter
by since they are automatically analyzed by Rekordbox, there is no feature for
analyzing mood, genre, or your personal taste. Whenever I add new music into my
library I will first analyze the tracks to get BPM and key, but then I will
label each track. By labeling I mean that I add labels in brackets in the
Comments section of each track which describe the genre, mood, and anything else
I might like to sort by later. I also rate the track from 0-5 stars using
Rekordbox's built in Rating column. As an example, in the Comments section of
one of my favorite songs called [Kingslayer by Caster &
Ironheart](https://soundcloud.com/ophelia_records/caster-ironheart-kingslayer)
I've written: "\[Dubstep\], \[Epic\], \[Orchestral\]" and I've rated it 5 stars.
When labeling a song I try to have at least one label for genre and mood
respectively, but the beauty of these labels is that you only need to use labels
that are helpful for you when sorting. Speaking of sorting, these labels can
then be used by an awesome feature in Rekordbox called [intelligent
playlists](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBCIzg-84xM&ab\_channel=DirtySecretz).
Each new intelligent playlist will pull songs from your entire collection based
on a few rules that you set. For example, I have an intelligent playlist for
Dubstep, which includes all tracks that contain the text "\[Dubstep\]" in their
comments. This means that every time I add a new track and label it as Dubstep,
it will automatically be added to this playlist. I've set up intelligent
playlists for all of my favorite genres and moods, making it very easy for me to
find what I need!

## Instructions for how to make a DJ mix!

3. Decide on the length and vibe of your mix

Think about your audience
Try to come up with a challenge or goal


3. Select a few signpost songs

4. Expand your signpost songs into song groups

![Related tracks window](/img/dj-post/rekordbox_related_tracks.png)

5. Check the beat grid and add cue points (optional)

Export mode

![Assigning cue points](/img/dj-post/rekordbox_cue_points.png)

6. Export your playlist to USB

7. Practice and experiment with transitions

You will need a DJ controller for this step

8. Decide on what order to play your songs

9. Practice your set from beginning to end

10. Add/remove songs and cue points as needed

11. Play and/or record your mix!





[example link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multilayer_perceptron)

