+++
date = "2022-01-07T16:25:31-04:00"
highlight = false
math = false
draft = false
tags = []
title = "How to Make A DJ Mix from Scratch"

[header]
  caption = ""
  image = ""

+++

![Me DJing at a local show](/img/headers/me-djing.jpg)

Those of you who know me well know that I have been a massive fan of electronic
dance music (aka EDM) for a long time. Every EDM fan has a different story for
how they got started, but I first learned about EDM back in around
2008\. I always loved the energy and excitement of guitar solos in rock and
metal, and I soon realized that I could find that same energy and
excitement but for the entirety of a song in electronic music. Starting on
Tiesto and Daft Punk got me hooked on Trance and House, and I soon found a home
in the Electro, Dubstep, and Drum & Bass communities.

What some of you might not know is that from 2010 to 2012 I actually ran [my own
EDM blog](https://quoththeraverarchive.wordpress.com/). While admittedly the
writing quality is a bit amateurish, I remember having a huge amount of fun
spending time digging around for new EDM and sharing it with curious friends. By
2012 the music of Skrillex and others had become so mainstream though that fewer
and fewer people were asking me for suggestions, and so I chose to end the blog.
Speaking of Skrillex, I actually [posted about
him](https://quoththeraverarchive.wordpress.com/2010/08/03/week-of-electro-part-3-skrillex/)
way back in 2010 before he released his eventually Grammy-winning and massively
influential EP Scary Monsters and Nice Sprites. For those of you who don't know,
Skrillex's earlier EDM production was a lot more electro focused, so back then I
chose [Slats Slats
Slats](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O3Q7LtUGfUg&ab_channel=SkrillexFullHD) as
my favorite track by him. I still love that track, so much so that I played it
in my [Sawtooth Soiree rave
mix](https://soundcloud.com/quoththeraver/sawtooth-soiree-set).

Since ending my blog I had a dream of DJing and producing my own music, but
getting a bachelors, masters, and PhD in engineering took up all of my time. Now
that I finally have my weekends back, I've been diving deep into DJing and music
production. While I am still relatively new to music production, I am thrilled
to say that I have now successfully DJed more than a few raves and parties. You
can find recordings of my favorite mixes on [my Soundcloud
profile](https://soundcloud.com/quoththeraver). I've recently been having a ton
of fun teaching my wife Becky and a few friends how to DJ, and so I thought that
it would be worth sharing my system for how to DJ in this blog post. I hope you
enjoy!

If you have any questions about what I've written here, feel free to write them
in the comments below! Also, these are only my thoughts and systems for DJing.
There are many other ways to succeed.

## What you need to get started

OK, thats enough of me telling my life story before sharing the recipe! Lets
start with what you will need before you can get started. Specifically, a music
library, DJ software, DJ hardware, and some musical knowledge.

1. Music Library

    Because we live in an age when streaming is king, most people listen to music
through Spotify, Soundcloud, and Apple Music. Thankfully some DJ software
(including Rekordbox) does enable you to play music from *some* streaming
services, but this functionality requires that you bring a laptop and have a
good internet connection wherever you play. Most DJs prefer to work with actual
song files instead since that offers the most flexibility and reliability.
[Pioneer CDJs](https://www.pioneerdj.com/en-us/product/player/) are an industry
standard and can conveniently load music from a properly formatted USB, so most
DJs don't need to bring anything other than a USB filled with their music files
when they go to play at a club.

    OK cool, so if you want to get music files for DJing how should you get
them? This is a legitimate question if you've become used to streaming.
Frustratingly, Spotify and the other streaming services purposefully make it
hard for you to buy music on their platform since otherwise you would have less
of a need for them. The best way that I've found so far to buy songs from a
Spotify playlist is a web app called [Merch
Table](https://hypem.com/merch-table) which can convert a spotify playlist into
a convenient list of links to buy the songs on
[Bandcamp](https://bandcamp.com/). If instead you're looking for an iTunes-esque
website optimized for DJing then you should check out
[Beatport](https://www.beatport.com/). Beatport has a significant advantage over
iTunes for a few reasons, but the biggest thing for me is seeing the BPM and key
for every track (this will become important when you're deciding which songs to
mix with others). Finally, you might not be aware of DJ Pools, which are monthly
subscriptions to services which enable you to download unlimited song files. For
more details and a recent review of the top DJ Pools, check out [this
post](https://djtechreviews.com/audio-software/best-dj-pool).

2. DJ Software

    Once you have your music library, you're ready to import it into your choice
of DJ software! DJ software will play a few important roles for you: music
library organization, track preparation for performance, and either exporting
your library to a USB or enabling a non-standalone DJ controller to play music.
There are quite a few options for DJ software, so if you're not sure which to
choose then I recommend taking a look at [this
post](https://www.sweetwater.com/insync/which-dj-software-is-right-for-me/)
which describes the pros and cons of the top 3 platforms. My personal favorite
DJ software is [Rekordbox](https://rekordbox.com/en/) because of its excellent
organization and USB export tools, so the rest of this blog post will describe
how to make a mix using Rekordbox specifically.

![Rekordbox window](/img/dj-post/rekordbox.PNG)

3. DJ Hardware

    Your home DJ studio will consist of a few components: a DJ controller or
CDJs+mixer, speakers, headphones, and optionally a formatted USB stick. Most people
already have speakers, headphones, and USB sticks, so here I'll quickly go over
the differences between DJ controllers, all-in-one DJ systems, and CDJs. Each
kind of DJ hardware has a different price point and different functionality, but
any of these types of hardware can be used to learn how to DJ. Because [Pioneer
DJ](https://www.pioneerdj.com/en-us/) is the standard in most bars and clubs
(and I also use Pioneer DJ hardware) all of the examples given below are from
Pioneer DJ, but hardware from other manufacturers like [Denon
DJ](https://www.denondj.com/) can also work for you. Also, the costs that I list
are for new equipment, but it is often possible to find used equipment on
Facebook marketplace or even in stores like Guitar Center. Older versions of
this hardware are often available as well, so keep an eye out for those if
you're trying to save money.

    * DJ Controller ($150-$250)

        If you are a beginner then a DJ controller is right for you. This is the
cheapest DJ hardware available, and when combined with a laptop it can do
absolutely everything you need to practice DJing.  You will need a computer to
organize your music anyway, so there is no harm in needing a computer to play
music. Most controllers also have convenient performance pads mapped to cue
points which I find to be especially helpful. Effects and looping functionality
are nearly always available as well. The example I show below is the [Pioneer
DDJ-400-N](https://www.pioneerdj.com/en-us/product/controller/ddj-400/gold/overview/#/color-picker),
which is very similar to the controller that I started out with.

        ![DJ Controller](/img/dj-post/DDJ-400.png)

    * All-in-one DJ System ($1,500-$2,000)

        If you are lucky enough to start DJing in clubs but don't have a ridiculous
amount of money to spend on a full club system for your home studio, you may be
interested in an all-in-one DJ system. All-in-one DJ systems offer all of the
same functionality of a DJ controller but also offer a built-in screen for
viewing waveforms & browsing songs, balanced connections for connecting to
professional speakers/monitors, and don't require a laptop. The layout of
all-in-one DJ systems is also very similar to the corresponding CDJs, which will
help you become familiar with that layout. Finally, all-in-one DJ systems work
by importing music from a USB (just like CDJs), so these systems are great for
big parties with multiple DJs since each new DJ only needs to connect their USB
to get started. The example I show below is the [Pioneer
XDJ-RX2](https://www.pioneerdj.com/en/product/all-in-one-system/xdj-rx3/black/overview/),
which is very similar to the system that I currently use at home.

        ![DJ System](/img/dj-post/XDJ-RX3.png)

    * CDJs and Mixer ($3,000-$7,000+)

        Most dance clubs that I am familiar with use CDJs and a mixer for their
DJ hardware. Clubs like to use CDJ + mixer setups because they are physically
more robust, they can have 4 or more audio sources (such as additional CDJs),
and because individual CDJs or mixers can be replaced without needing to replace
the entire system. Before you dump $5k on a few CDJs though you should be aware
that they also have a lot of drawbacks! Beyond being very expensive, CDJ +
mixer setups don't typically have performance pads for cue points (sometimes
limiting you to 3 cue points total), don't enable you to beatmatch by eye since
each display only shows one track at a time, and are physically huge which can
be real problem for folks in small apartments. So why would you as a bedroom DJ
ever want CDJs and a mixer? The only real reason to do this is so that you can
practice on equipment that is similar or identical to what you will be playing
on live at a club. If you rely on many cue points and beatmatching by eye while
practicing then you might be caught totally off guard when you're asked to play
without those nice tools. The example I show below is a pair of [Pioneer
CDJ-3000s](https://www.pioneerdj.com/en/product/player/cdj-3000/black/overview/)
and a [Pioneer DJM-900NXS2
mixer](https://www.pioneerdj.com/en-us/product/mixer/djm-900nxs2/black/overview/).

        ![CDJs and Mixer](/img/dj-post/DJM-900NXS2-and-CDJ-3000-pair.png)

4. Musical Knowledge

    The last thing that you'll need before you get started on DJing is some
musical knowledge. 

Beats, bars, phrases, BPM, key


## How to make your very first DJ mix!

1. Import your music into Rekordbox

Describe what settings to change

2. Organize your music library

Describe smart crates, our tagging method, etc

1. Decide on the vibe you want your mix to have

Think about your audience
Try to come up with a challenge or goal


3. Select a few signpost songs

4. Expand your signpost songs into song groups

![Related tracks window](/img/dj-post/rekordbox_related_tracks.png)

5. Check the beat grid and add cue points (optional)

![Assigning cue points](/img/dj-post/rekordbox_cue_points.png)

6. Export your playlist to USB

7. Practice and experiment with transitions

You will need a DJ controller for this step

8. Decide on what order to play your songs

9. Practice your set from beginning to end

10. Add/remove songs and cue points as needed

11. Play and/or record your mix!





[example link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multilayer_perceptron)

